#The PizzaNet

> “History has been made.  Ordering pizza from your computer.  It's the fulfillment of a hacker dream at least as old as computer networking.”

> Posted to the Computer-Underground Digest by Bill Higgins of the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory.

In the Summer of 2004, the first lines of code for Internet Explorer 1.0 were being written by Microsoft engineers in Seattle. Nearby, Jeff Bezos had recently incorporated Cadabra, the company that would later launch Amazon.com. Pierre Omidyar was a year away from registering eBay.com. The World Wide Web was in its infancy.

Meanwhile in Wichita, Kansas, an international food chain founded in 1958 by brothers Dan and Frank Carney was preparing to launch one of the first eCommerce sites in Internet history. On Monday, August 22nd 1994, Pizza Hut and the Santa Cruz Operation issued a joint press release announcing the launch of PizzaNet, “a pilot program that enables computer users, for the first time, to electronically order pizza delivery from their local Pizza Hut restaurant via the worldwide Internet.”

##Unusual innovators
Trying to figure out who was involved in a pilot project at a subsidiary of PepsiCo almost 20 years ago wasn’t easy. But after a few phone calls I found myself on the phone Rob Doughty, the author of the original press release, and VP of Communications at Pizza Hut at the time of the launch. “We’d spent months in meetings trying to figure out this Internet thing,” he told me, “some bright spark realized that by taking orders online we could build a great customer database. We’d have their address, phone number, email address, and then marry that with pizza preferences.”


##The Designer Pizza
It was a pivotal moment: for the first time a major corporation (Pizza Hut was owned by PepsiCo at the time) chose to use the web for a major commercial push. Only three years had passed Tim Berners-Lee announced the World Wide Web project on the alt.hypertext newgroup, and a full two years before commercial activity on Internet backbone was officially authorized by the National Science Foundation’s acceptable use policy. 

The LA Times picked up on the story, and ran an article entitled “On-Line Pizza Is Clever but Only Half-Baked.” Their take on the story is fun to read:
> Why phone or fax your order for a 14-inch extra-cheese, half-mushroom, half-pepperoni with onion-- hold the oregano! --pizza when you can order it virtually via the Internet? It's the Geek Chic way to nosh.

The author - Michael Schrage, at the time a research associate at MIT – doesn’t think much of of the idea though:
> Still, as computationally clever as on-line ordering may be, it misses the point of what this medium can do. Fundamentally, there's not much difference between ordering a pizza over the phone and ordering one on-line. The transaction is basically a commodity. The trick is to figure out new ways to create value for the customer.

> Instead of simply letting people order a pizza, why not let them design it as well? Instead of showing an ordinary menu with a list of toppings, show a picture of a pizza with the toppings clustered on the side. Let teen-agers and college students build their own pizzas on-screen. Present a palette of toppings and let people place their mushrooms and green peppers and pepperoni anywhere on the pizza they want. The real pizza is customized accordingly. In other words, computer-aided pizza engineering.

Undoubtedly Schrage was off the mark in predicting that the real market was in pizza design software. But in the same article suggests that customized T-Shirts might be a better market for the suggestion … which was far more accurate. 

##11 days earlier: NetMarket
Pizza Hut and SCO were actually just a few days off from making Internet history. Eleven days before, at around noon of August 11th 1994, Phil Brandenberger  of Philadelphia ordered the Sting album “Ten Summoner’s Tales” from NetMarket.com for $12.48, marking the first eCommerce transaction in Internet history. 

That transaction required some determination. NetMarket, founded by Daniel Kohn and Guy Fernald, had ported a version of ViaCrypt PGP for their servers, and published their public Key. To make a purchase, Phil Brandenberger had to install PGP on his local Unix machine (Windows and Mac were not supported), compile X Mosaic using customized scripts to enable PGP encryption, and then send his own public key to NetMarket.

About 6 months later, Netscape publicly released the first version of the SSL protocol, which despite having “a number of security flaws,” paved the way for online commerce as we know it.
